[Docs] ES UI form library (#78654)
elastic/kibana: src/plugins/es_ui_shared/docs/docs/form_lib/examples/validation.md

---
id: validation
title: Validation
sidebar_label: Validation
---

## Basic

```js
import React from 'react';
import {
  useForm,
  Form,
  UseField,
  FieldConfig,
} from '<path-to-form-lib>';

interface MyForm {
  name: string;
}

const nameConfig: FieldConfig<MyForm, string> = {
  validations: [
    {
      validator: ({ value }) => {
        if (value.trim() === '') {
          return {
            message: 'The name cannot be empty.',
          };
        }
      },
    },
    // ...
    // You can add as many validations as you need.

>     // It is better to kepp validators single purposed.

Reviewer: I mean validating a single type of error. To avoid creating a gigantic validator that can't be reused anywhere.

```js
if (value.length === 0) {
  return { message: 'The field cannot be empty' }
}

if (value.contains('/') {
  return { message: 'The char "/" is not allowed' }
}

...
```

>     // It is better to kepp validators single purposed.

Reviewer: I added a comment to explain the good practice.

  ],
};

export const ValidationBasic = () => {
  const { form } = useForm<MyForm>();

  return (
    <Form form={form}>
      <UseField path="name" config={nameConfig}>
        {(field) => {

>           const isInvalid = !field.isChangingValue && field.errors.length > 0;

Reviewer: Yes. It is documented in the "core > Field hook" API

>           const isInvalid = !field.isChangingValue && field.errors.length > 0;

Reviewer: Yes. It is documented in the "core > Field hook" API

          return (
            <>
              <EuiFieldText
                isInvalid={isInvalid}
                value={field.value}
                onChange={field.onChange}
                fullWidth
              />

>               {!field.isValid && <div>{field.getErrorsMessages()}</div>}

Reviewer: Good idea. I went ahead and added the `<EuiFormRow />`

            </>
          );
        }}
      </UseField>
    </Form>
  );
};
```

> ## Reusable validators

Reviewer: Good point. I added a note and removed this example.

* must be a valid index name (try adding a "?" or "/" character so see the validation)
* cannot be empty

```js
import React from 'react';
import { i18n } from '@kbn/i18n';
import {
  fieldValidators,
  ...
} from '<path-to-form-lib>';

const { emptyField, indexNameField } = fieldValidators;

const nameConfig: FieldConfig<MyForm, string> = {
  validations: [
    {
      validator: emptyField('The name cannot be empty,'),
    },
    {
      validator: indexNameField(i18n),
    },
  ],
};

export const ReusableValidations = () => {
  const { form } = useForm<MyForm>();

  return (
    <Form form={form}>
      <UseField<string> path="name" config={nameConfig}>
        {(field) => {
          const isInvalid = !field.isChangingValue && field.errors.length > 0;
          return (
            <>
              <EuiFieldText
                isInvalid={isInvalid}
                value={field.value}
                onChange={field.onChange}
                fullWidth
              />
              {!field.isValid && <div>{field.getErrorsMessages()}</div>}
            </>
          );
        }}
      </UseField>
    </Form>
  );
};
```

> ## Asynchronous validation

Reviewer: I prefer to keep two separate blocks. Although you are right that there was a lot of overlap so I left the `fieldConfig` configuration and removed the redundant component below.

> You can mix synchronous and asynchronous validations. Although it is usually better to first declare the synchronous one(s), this way if any of those ones fails, the asynchronous validation is not executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can mix synchronous and asynchronous validations. Although it is usually better to first declare the synchronous one(s), this way if any of those fail, the asynchronous validation is not executed.
```

          setTimeout(() => {
            if (isCanceled) {
              console.log('This promise has been canceled, skipping');
              return resolve();
            }

            if (value === 'bad') {
              resolve({ message: 'This index already exists' });
            }
            resolve();
          }, 2000);
        });

        promise.cancel = () => {
          isCanceled = true;
        };

        return promise;
      },
    },
  ],
};

export const CancelAsyncValidation = () => {
  const { form } = useForm<MyForm>();
  return (
    <Form form={form}>
      <UseField<string> path="name" config={nameConfig}>
        {(field) => {
          const isInvalid = !field.isChangingValue && field.errors.length > 0;
          return (
            <>
              <EuiFieldText
                isInvalid={isInvalid}
                value={field.value}
                onChange={field.onChange}
                isLoading={field.isValidating}
                fullWidth
              />
              {isInvalid && <div>{field.getErrorsMessages()}</div>}
            </>
          );
        }}
      </UseField>
    </Form>
  );
};
```

## Typed validation

> It is possible to give a `type` to a validation to cover some cases where you need different validation type for the same field. Let's imagine that we have a form field to enter "tags" (an array of string). The array cannot be left empty and the tags cannot contain the "?" and "/" characters.

Reviewer: Interesting. I don't have another example for typed validation so we can go ahead and change the title and description as you suggest. We can revisit in the future if more examples come in. 👍

> It is possible to give a `type` to a validation to cover some cases where you need different validation type for the same field. Let's imagine that we have a form field to enter "tags" (an array of string). The array cannot be left empty and the tags cannot contain the "?" and "/" characters.

Reviewer: Interesting. I don't have another example for typed validation so we can go ahead and change the title and description as you suggest. We can revisit in the future if more examples come in. 👍

The field `value` is an array of string, and the default (not typed) validation(s) will run against this array of string. We are going to use a typed validation for the array items.

**Note:** Typed validation are not executed when the field value changes, we need to manually validate the field with `field.validate(...)`.

```js
const tagsConfig: FieldConfig<MyForm, string[]> = {

>   defaultValue: [],

Reviewer: I think adding an example of what `defaultValue` is for in the "Validation" example page might deviate the attention. If the reader is confused about that parameter I expect him to find the "Core > defaultValue" page to clarify any doubt.

            if (!isValid) {
              // Reject the user's input.
              return false;
            }

            field.setValue([...field.value, value]);
          };

          const onChange = (options: EuiComboBoxOptionOption[]) => {
            field.setValue(options.map((option) => option.label));
          };

          const onSearchChange = (value: string) => {
            if (value !== undefined) {
              // Clear immediately the "arrayItem" validation type
              field.clearErrors('arrayItem');
            }
          };

          return (
            <>
              <EuiComboBox
                noSuggestions
                placeholder="Type and then hit ENTER"
                selectedOptions={field.value.map((v) => ({ label: v }))}
                onCreateOption={onCreateOption}
                onChange={onChange}
                onSearchChange={onSearchChange}
                fullWidth
              />
              {!field.isValid && <div>{errorMessage}</div>}
              <button onClick={form.submit}>Submit</button>
            </>
          );
        }}
      </UseField>
    </Form>
  );
};
```

> Great, but that's **a lot** of code for a simple tags field input. Fortunatelly the `<ComboBoxField />` helper component takes care of all the heavy lifting for us. The above component can simply be:

Reviewer: Good idea 👍 I went ahead and moved it to the "Components" page.

> Great, but that's **a lot** of code for a simple tags field input. Fortunatelly the `<ComboBoxField />` helper component takes care of all the heavy lifting for us. The above component can simply be:

Reviewer: Good idea 👍 I went ahead and moved it to the "Components" page.

> Great, but that's **a lot** of code for a simple tags field input. Fortunatelly the `<ComboBoxField />` helper component takes care of all the heavy lifting for us. The above component can simply be:

Reviewer: Good idea 👍 I went ahead and moved it to the "Components" page.
